Dr. Safrid, uh, would you mind telling
us about your background?
>> Yeah, well, thank you, uh, very much.
Nice to be here. Um, well, I'm, uh, a
PhD. I got my PhD in genetics, uh,
master's degree in genetics, uh, from
Illinois State University with Dr.
Herman Brockman. And then I got a a PhD
in genetics from the University of
Illinois
uh, with the late Bill Daniel. uh and
then I did post-doal work at Yale
University in the department of
neurology uh where I where I studied
epilepsy and uh uh glyolippid
biochemistry. So I was there for nine
years um also on the faculty at Yale
University School of Medicine. And then
I've been at Boston College since 1985
pursuing my research in uh epilepsy,
glycobiology and and cancer. Uh but
we've now really shifted almost
completely over to the cancer issue. Um
so this is now my primary research uh
emphasis is on um on the management and
prevention of cancer. That's
interesting. I hadn't heard about uh
your your your background in epilepsy. I
think the first time that I ever heard
about ketogenic diets on epilepsy
patients, it was kind of mind-blowing to
me. um you kind of don't believe it
initially, but then you start hearing
anecdotes of parents that changed their
kids' diets and they don't have any more
seizures and the Navy Seals did a study
on it and then it's like, "Wow, that's
so crazy." How was that? Did is there a
correlation there between you studying
the ketogenesis pathways with epilepsy
uh and and starting to understand like
nutrition or how was that process for
you in terms of like how nutrition has
such a big impact in our health?
>> Yeah. Well, I mean when I was at Yale I
was interested um I thought maybe
ketogenic diet because it was the
ketogenic diet got its first fame with
um the management of epilepsy in 1921.
Wilder at Mayo Clinic in Rochester,
Minnesota was the first uh to test
ketogenic diets on children. Um what
what he had studied was that water only
fasting uh could also manage seizures.
But the problem is you can only do that
for so long. Uh and then he developed a
a diet that would uh replicate the
biochemistry in the blood. Uh so you
could um uh uh get get a biochemical
readout similar to water only fasting
but you didn't have to starve yourself.
So that was pretty powerful stuff. Um
you know Dr. William Lennox had done
some studies on this as well. He was a
giant in the field of epilepsy research
some years ago. And the mechanism by
which a ketogenic diet would block
epileptic seizures was never and still
isn't fully understood. um it works.
It's something that really works well
but uh there's a lot of ideas about the
mechanism by which it works. And when I
was working on epilepsy because that was
the main focus at Yale University's
department of neurology where the
leading one of the leading schools in
the in the world on epilepsy um you know
mechanisms of epilepsy and and and what
I I began to realize um in studying this
was that blood glucose uh played a very
important role and then later when we
started to do research on on ketogenic
diets uh the it's we were able to show
that calorie restriction uh which is
like water only fasting or ketogenic
diets were equally effective in blocking
seizures. And then we were able to to
relate seizure protection directly to
the levels of of of glucose in the
blood. And this is what we were seeing
my my physician colleagues were seeing
in patients. You can have a patient
managed, a child managed long term for
many months uh without a breakthrough
seizure and then um you know a drink of
juice, a candy bar, a muffin or whatever
would spike the glucose and within a few
minutes the the child would explode into
a to a seizure. So whatever whatever was
was involved it was it was the um m
maintenance of low low steady glucose
level in the blood seemed to be um
linked uh to um protection. Now
elevation of ketones of course a lot of
people were interested in you know what
role do ketones play in managing
epileptic seizures and and that's where
a lot of the focus is continuing today.
um is it the low glucose or is it the
elevated ketones uh that are largely
responsible for maintaining seizure,
preventing breakthrough seizures and
things like this? And the answer is
we're still not sure. Uh there's a GABA
gammaic acid um uh inhibitory
neurotransmitter that's related to
ketone metabolism. So there's there's a
lot of things that could potentially be
involved, but it seems like it's
probably a combination of a number of
things. uh but with with respect to
cancer uh there also where glucose we
and others have shown we were the first
group to show a direct relationship
between how fast tumors would grow and
the level of blood sugar. We have a much
more clear understanding of how uh
ketogenic metabolic therapy targets
cancer than we do understanding how
ketogenic metabolic therapy may manage
epileptic seizures. So the epileptic
seizure field will be wrestling with
this for the next several desk decades.
But uh we we now know in the cancer
field we know exact we know pretty
pretty solidly what's going on.
>> That's great and I can't wait to get
into that. And before we go into that,
for you personally, did you always
understand
maybe the way that you that that you
grew up that or maybe your education or
maybe a personal journey that that diet
could have such a big impact or
ketogenic diet or or or low sugar diet
or whatever that had such an impact in
our health. For me as a physician, I
actually didn't think that, you know,
it's it's just crazy to think now
because my practice is so different, but
but like, you know, when I first started
my career, I didn't I mean, we never
were taught about this in medical
school. It just didn't it didn't click
that much, you know.
>> Yeah. Well, as far as, you know, d I I
I'm not uh recognized for my work on
diet. You know, diet's a very ambiguous
thing. Um we we we can achieve uh great
health uh with the appropriate diet but
it's so ambiguous what what what might
work for one person may not be effective
for another person.
>> We we we were we were interested in the
molecular mechanism of action.
>> We we're interested in knowing how to
kill tumor cells without harming the
body.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Uh and that's that's where our
thrust of energy comes to. Now, of
course, if you know how to use the diet
as a tool or diet itself as medicine,
you you need to know uh that. But um
more importantly, you need to know that
the tumor cells can't live without the
sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/ keto for cancer,
the new community by our research
analyst Johnny Rocker. Within this new
community platform, you can connect with
other patients and learn from their
experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Ciphford, we will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid. Additionally, we
prepared a list of doctors specialized
in metabolic therapy as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and
hyperbaric oxygen protocols. So, take a
look around at school.com/ keto for
cancer.
So many people are confused
when I tell them this that it's not only
the sugar, the glutamine, but you cannot
ma you cannot manage glutamine with
diet. you have to target the glutamine
um uh to kill cancer cells. You can't
there's no diet. Exercise can lower a
little bit of glutamine. Uh but uh you
need drugs and that's what we're working
on the drugs to target the gluten. All
these people say, "Oh, I how do I lower
glutamine from diet?" Well, let me tell
you, you can't. Okay,
>> got it.
>> You can't do that because glutamine is
the number one neur uh metabolite in our
bloodstream. We make a buttload of it
and there's no diet that's going to be
low enough to kill a cancer cell by
lowering glutamine. Uh yes, for glucose
for sure, but not for glutamine. You
need drugs and we know the drugs to kill
to target glutamine. We know them. You
can't do it with diet alone. You got to
do it with a drug. The tumor cell can't
survive without glucose and glutamine.
And the diet's not going to help you
with the glutamine to any great extent.
You need a drug.
>> Got it. And then and so whenever you
were starting down this pathway, um what
was the first researcher that kind of
looked into this um into how glutamine
and glucose impact the biology of cancer
cells?
>> Well, that every I don't I keep using
these terms every it turns out many
people in the cancer metabolism field
know that glutamine is a powerful driver
uh of of cancer cells. People just know
that if you take cancer cells and put
them in a culture dish, they can't grow
very well without glucose and glutamine.
Um so if you take away glucose and
glutamine, most cancer cells will will
will die. Now what we did just recently
um to look at that in brain cancer uh
what we have a paper was recently
published and is getting a lot of
recognition. Um what we take cells and
we put them in a culture dish. Uh now of
course we're interrogating what a tumor
cell needs to have to survive.
>> And what type of cancer was this?
>> Is a bra glyobblasto.
>> Oh glyobblastoomas. Yeah. Yeah. Brain
cancer. But it works. The same thing can
be said for almost every cancer. They're
all they're all similar in their in
their dependency on a on a on these
fuels.
>> And of course our job was to figure out
the mechanism. What what what makes
these fuels so important for the
continued survival and growth of a tumor
cell? Well, glutamine is an amino acid
and glutamine is the most abundant amino
acid in our body. It's higher than any
of the other amino acids. Um, but the
tumor cells use this amino acid just as
well as our gut and our immune system.
So we have to recognize the importance
of glutamine as an incredibly important
metabolite for the health and vitality
of our normal cells in our body, our
normal physiological function. Um but so
how do we know that? Well, uh we take
the tumor cells and we put them in in um
saline solution which is just simply a
buffered salt uh which has nothing. And
then you time and see how long it takes
for all of the tumor cells that you put
in the dish to die. Okay? So, in other
words, you're starving them of
everything. You just put them in the
dish. No food, no serum, nothing. And
you see, uh, okay, great. What happens
to them? Yes, they die. There's nothing
for them to eat, and they're going to
die. Without energy, everything dies.
All right. So, you you just say, "Okay,
they're all die. In 24 hours, all these
cells are dead." Okay. So if we add back
with the in the buffered solution uh
each individual amino acid by itself and
see what it does to the survival of the
tumor cells. Um uh every every amino
acid has a a little bit of a bump. Uh it
causes the the cell to survive just a
few minutes longer or just a little bit
longer. But then when you hit glutamine,
boom, the cells the cells clearly perk
up and they live much longer uh than any
of the other amino acids. So clearly
glutamine is this. Now many uh people in
the uh cancer metabolism field have
recognized this and they and some they
say many metastatic cancers are are what
they call glutamine addicted. They can't
even grow without the glutamine. So it's
called glutamine addiction and it's many
scientific papers discussing this from
many some of the top labs in the world
about the importance of glutamine. Now
what what we have now listen to this uh
our immune system uh consists of te-
cells, b cells, macrofagages, luccoytes,
natural killer cells, all these
different kinds of cells. Uh it was
known in biology that the immune system
uh a normal immune system needs
glutamine. Okay, our normal immune cells
are also glutamine hogs. They to do to
fight bacteria, to uh fix wounds, to do
the normal maintenance of our of our
body. Our immune cells also use
glutamine and the glutamine in our blood
is very high. So it supports everything.
Our gut, our intestinal tract uh gut
uses tremendous amounts of glutamine.
The ura cycle uses glutamine. Glutamine
is like a really really it's called a
non-essential amino acid because the
body can make it from glucose but in in
a sense it's a very essential amino acid
but for so many different functions. So
what we we found many years ago is that
metastatic cancers all metastatic
cancers are derived in one way or
another from immune cells especially
macrofages. So when we look at the uh uh
biology of macrofasages, we know from
the work of the new scopes in Oxford,
England and others that um immune cells
are really heavily dependent on
glutamine and the metastatic cells of
all major cancers whether it's breast
cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer,
they're all part of macrofasages. So you
know that the metastatic cancer is going
to be strongly dependent on the
availability of glutamine. But you can't
go in and remove glutamine because
you're going to paralyze and hurt our
normal immune cells that also need the
same metabolite. So this is where we
developed the press pulse therapeutic
strategy where glucose is a
non-essential amino acid but the tumor
cells need glucose as well. Uh tumor
glucose is a non-essential metabolite.
Okay? And we can push glucose down
really really low but you can't do that
to glutamine without harming your your
body significantly. Mhm.
>> So then we developed the pulsing. So
once you get a choke hold on the
glucose, you come in with the pulsing of
the glutamine and diets aren't going to
do this. The diet is great to lower the
glucose, but the diet ain't going to
lower that glutamine. So you got to come
in and pulse the glutamine with drugs.
And we developed the we found the Dawn
drug 60 oxyucine is the most powerful
glutamine inhibitor that we know of. And
so when you say pulse it when you say
pulse it biochemically what he's doing
is just does it attach it to and it
makes it into into an inactive
metabolite or what does it do?
>> No no no no p there's um no no that's
not correct. Not let me say pulsing is
when you give a a a small amount of the
drug for a short period of time and then
take it away.
>> Got it.
>> Okay. That's pulsing as opposed to
pressing. You can you can press and hold
down glucose over long periods of time
and that's what a a water only fasting
or calorierestricted ketogenic diet or
these things will do. They'll lower the
blood sugar and you can keep the blood
sugar down because your body can switch
to ketone bodies and fatty acids. They
don't need that sugar.
>> So we can choke hold the sugar by by
pressing it. Press press press press.
But that you can't press glutamine
because you're going to harm your immune
system. You're going to harm your gut.
You're going to harm everything. So you
have to pulse. So you come in with a
drug, a small dosage at a critical time
and pull it right away. And that kills
the tumor cell but does not kill the
immune cell. So the immune cells are
paralyzed but they're not killed by
targeting glutamine. So you pulse you
kill the tumor cell but then you take
that drug off because you need your
immune system to pick up the dead
corpses from the tumor cells that are
killed. So you have to know you put the
choke hold on the glucose and you come
in and you pulse the glutamine with a
drug and that's together you destroy
your tumor cell without toxic your
cancer without toxicity and then you
transition the whole body over to
ketones and fatty acids because the
tumor cells can't burn fatty acids and
ketones. So they're trapped because they
they have abnormal mitochondria. They
you need a good mitochondria to
metabolize fatty acids and ketone
bodies. And all major cancers have
defective mitochondria oxidative
phosphorilation. you know how to trap
them. Checkmate. That's it. So, uh um
and unfortunately you guys in the
medical community, you ne you never got
any training on diet like you said. Uh
and you never got training on how to use
food as medicine.
>> And and you and the and they don't train
people to know that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease, not a
genetic disease. So consequently we have
all these oncologists that are really
not trained to really understand what
the what the nature of the biological
problem is. I agree with you. I think it
probably if I asked a lot of my
colleagues oncologist what the
biological process whether a tumor cell
has an abnormal mitochondria or not
whether a tumor cells what is it using
as fuel. Um I guarantee you probably I
didn't know until you just told me right
now, you know, and so um and so I think
it is very very very uh I mean we've
been going down this pathway
and we got to make a right turn. I mean
it seems like we have to really start
diving in into how to be able to put it
all together. And so when you're saying
metabolic therapy uh that I've heard you
say that term is a combination of things
I'm hearing it's a combination of of of
of drugs it's a combination of uh
probably dietary approaches all of it
has to come together it seems like to to
starve it's like war you really want to
like you want to starve your opponents
of of of everything and and hit him
everywhere you can right
>> yeah well that's true and and and what
we've learned from Warberg and our own
work energy Energ is everything. Without
energy, nothing can live. Um, so where
does the tumor cell get its energy from?
How how is this cell able to get energy?
And we have clearly shown that it's the
metabolism of these two fuels through
the glycolysis pathway in the cytoplasm
and in the glutamolysis pathway in the
mitochondria. We have actually shown the
two pathways that are driving the
disregulated growth of these tumor
cells. That's why we know that what we
have to do to kill them and it's not as
complicated as people make it out to be.
So the question is why is that? Why do
why does your your profession not know
what I am saying? And one of the reasons
is that when you go to medical school
you are told that cancer is a genetic
disease. You are not told that cancer is
a meta a metabolic disorder. So people
are chasing genes and uh uh they're
looking at all the mutations that you
see in these tumor cells and then you
develop these extremely expensive and
toxic drugs to target the so-called
abnormal mutations. But if cancer is not
a genetic disease, most of that stuff is
not going to be as a a long-term
solution to the problem. So consequently
we and today in this country today we
have almost 1,700
people dying each day from cancer which
comes to about 70 people per hour are
dying from cancer and it's getting worse
and worse and it's affecting younger and
younger people and they keep chasing
genes doing all this genetic stuff which
is largely irrelevant and wasted time.
The cancer cell cannot live without
glucose and glutamine and cannot switch
to fatty acids and ketone bodies. Bang,
there it is. Now, people will say, "Oh,
that's too simple. Uh, it can't be that
simple." Uh, well, it's not as quite as
simple as I'm making it out to be, but
it certainly isn't as complicated as
spending hundreds of millions of dollars
targeting genes that are downstream
epiphenomen. They're not the they're the
effect of the disregulated growth, not
the cause of the disregulated growth.
It's unbelievable. So all cancer cells,
all of them have abnormal mitochondria.
>> I haven't yet found any tumor that has
normal mitochondria. So I published a
big paper on this in eye science. I went
through all of the major cancers. I had
to go back and dig up all these electron
microscopic pathology reports from the
60s and the 70s and sometimes even
earlier and look at the mitochondria
under the electron microscope. I I
didn't I just had to go back to the
library and get the the journal articles
and then look at what those guys were
showing and the mitochondria are are
empty. They have crystal breakdown of
Christ and then they have a lot of lipid
droplets appearing in the cytoplasm. So
I just published a recent paper. It it
appears that is that if your
mitochondria are defective, the
mitochondria cannot use fatty acids. And
what happens the fatty acids accumulate
in the cytoplasm as lipid droplets. So
when you look under the microscope
electron microscopy in cancer mostly you
see mitochondria that are abnormal in
number and structure and all of these
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm. They're
stored in the cytoplasm because they
can't be burned in the mitochondria.
Mitochondria defective. So I found
>> is like a microscopic version of fatty
liver disease.
>> Yes, exactly. It's it's very similar to
that uh lipid droplets because in fatty
liver disease the mitochondria are also
not working well. So, but we see now
there's different reasons for why the
mitochondria working and and that's
interesting because uh we found that all
provocative cancer agents uh whe whether
they're carcinogens
uh whether it's hypoxia, whether it's
ankcogenic viruses, radiation, uh uh
intermittent uh in chronic inflammation.
All of those conditions chronically
damage the ability of the mitochondria
to use energy from oxygen. consequently
leading to a shift to using uh energy
without oxygen which is fermentation.
And then you say oh okay what are the
fuels that are driving this fermentation
and we interrogated all this stuff and
it's only glucose and glutamine that are
the drivers of this fermentation energy
without oxygen. So now you say, "Oh, if
that's the case, to manage cancer
effectively, all we have to do is take
patients, reduce their blood sugar down
real low, uh, healthy low a and then um
that and then you come in, uh,
transition the whole body off to fatty
acids and ketones, which the normal
cells can burn and we can be healthy,
but the tumor cells can't." And then you
come in with the glutamine targeting
drug and knock them out. So um, it's not
that complicated, right?
Oh man, that is something to to to to
that that's interesting. And so what is
the point at which a cell let's say I'm
a I'm I'm a regular cell in the body and
I'm going about my life and I'm having
any one of the cancer triggers like what
you're talking about and it's either an
endocrine disruptor, an encogenic virus,
a radiation, a mutation
and then what happens then that my
mitochondria what is happening that I
that my mitochondria has to become
defective to cope with it or
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So what what happens
is uh the mitochondria control the
destiny of our cells. U the mitochondria
control the destiny of our very
existence on the planet. Uh when the
mitochondria in our bodies run out of
energy, we die. Okay? And human beings
uh if if you can make a hundred like the
late Jimmy Carter, we have this big
ceremony for him today. 100 years old is
a pretty old guy. Uh right. Um, so, uh,
but we don't have human beings living to
be 150 years of age. You don't The
oldest person that ever lived was Madame
Clement from France. I think she was
122. That was the longest any human
being has ever survived on the planet.
>> So, we have a lifespan. Uh, elephants
have a lifespan. Dogs and cats, all
these animals have different lifespans,
which is dictated in large part by the
mitochondria of those organisms. So, so
we know that our existence on the planet
depends on the efficiency and function
of the mitochondria. Uh, and that gives
us energy and with energy we can we can
live. So, so we we we know this but uh
as you said what is it that triggers
cancer from damage to mitochondria?
Well, let me tell you, if you if you
have a heart attack, uh cardiovascular
event, um all you you you you fall down
because you're no longer breathing
because your heart stopped pumping
blood. And uh if you look at the
patient, of course, if you don't massage
his heart, give him press compression
and whatever, he's going to be dead. So,
you got to get that heart beating again
so so he he can live. Now, listen to
this. When a if you look at a person
who's just had a heart attack, their
blood if you take a sample of the blood,
it's filled with lactic acid and suinic
acid. This is known all cancer p well
all heart attack patients uh have these
two fuels immediately increase in the
bloodstream.
>> Okay. Why is that? Because the uh our
mitochondria oxygen consumption has
stopped. But we have an a second uh
default energy state which is
fermentation. And the fuels for
fermentation are the sugar in the blood
and the amino acid glutamine. Now these
two in normal cells will will burn these
same two fuels uh to allow the cell to
stay alive for what how long can you
live with a heart? Maybe five minutes if
you don't get oxygen back in and then
your brain dies and you're dead. But if
you can get the oxygen back, uh, all of
a sudden lactic acid and suinic acid
disappear because you're breathing
again. Now, um, and you don't need
fermentation. You don't need to get
energy from fuels that can give you
energy without oxygen, which is called
fermentation, lactic acid fermentation
and suinic acid fermentation. So, they
build up in the blood because we're not
breathing. We're not using oxygen. As
soon as we use oxygen, they disappear
real quick.
um that's and if and if we don't do
that, we're going to be dead from brain
damage. Uh so the cancer cell is always
locked into producing lactic acid and
suinic acid because its mitochondria is
permanently damaged even in the presence
of oxygen. This is what Warberg showed
out of Warberg many years ago. So he
showed cancer cells continue to produce
these fermentation waste products even
in the presence of 100% oxygen. What's
going on here? And that's because they
have permanent structural damage in the
mitochondria. Now, that doesn't happen
quickly. The heart attack is quick.
Cancer cells acquire that damage from
chronic insults to that organel over
time. Now, what could that be? Constant
exposure to a carcinogen. Carcinogen
comes into the mitochondria, doesn't
knock it out right away, just impairs
its ability to function normally. But
the continued exposure to that chemical
carcinogen eventually causes the cell to
switch to a fermentation. Now, here's
what's interesting. The mitochondria is
telling the nucleus of the cell to to do
its normal function. However, if the if
the oxygen coming into the cell is not
being used for energy, something is
happening. The mitochondria efficiency,
the mitochondria signals the nucleus,
it's like picks up a phone immediately
calls the nucleus and says, "Open the
floodgates for the glucose and the
glutamine on the surface of the
membranes and that's an ankco gene." So,
the ankco gene turns on and all of a
sudden the the surface of the cell
starts to bring in more and more glucose
and glutamine. And when this happens,
the the the mitochondria lose control of
the destiny of the cell and the cell
falls back on ancient fermentation
pathways that existed in all biological
cells before oxygen came into the
atmosphere 2.5 billion years ago. Now
the only way you can understand what I
am saying is you have to really
understand biological evolution. If pe
there's another gap in in our in our
medical establishment. Half the people
have no clue about biological evolution.
If you don't understand, you might as
well be speaking in a foreign language.
Uh the brain must understand. It must
have some level of scientific literacy
to understand what the hell I'm talking
about. Um but biological evolution, we
emerged as single cell organisms on this
planet. That's who we all are. Single
cell organisms. And we came in an
environment where there was no oxygen in
the atmosphere. only certain bacteria
were able eventually to produce oxygen
and then there was a fusion a symbiosis
between two organisms that allowed us to
develop multisellular organisms which
eventually leads to all uh ukarotic
multisellular organisms where we have a
division of labor. We have a
mitochondria in the cytoplasm that used
to be a separate organism in a cytoplasm
of another cell that could ferment. So
the two the two organisms uh together in
the same cytoplasm have a division of
labor for energy and that energy is the
mitochondria is so energyefficient but
if it becomes impaired it falls back on
this ancient pathway that existed before
oxygen came into the planet. So it's
still there. The glycolysis pathway is
an ancient pathway. The glutamonolysis
path these are ancient pathways. So our
our big finding recently was that
Warberg always knew that the tumor cells
were fermenting glucose. He did not know
about glutamine fermentation. So we have
now found a second fuel not respired
with oxygen but fermented just like the
glucose. Now we know the two fuels
driving the beast. We know how to stop
it. We know how to manage it. The
problem is what I am telling you right
now cannot be for whatever reason cannot
be understood. cannot be believed or
even appreciated uh for a variety of
reasons. Some of them are confirmation
bias like, "Oh, everybody knows cancer
is a genetic disease. What the hell am I
talking about? How could how could I be
right when the whole world thinks it's
something other than that?" The world is
wrong. It's not a genetic disease.
Period. We got 1,700 people a day dying
from this misunderstanding. Once you
understand it's a metabolic disease,
then you're going to have clear
strategies on how to manage this disease
without toxicity. So, we just published
a big paper. I don't know people not
reading this stuff. They keep asking me
all these goddamn questions and and the
paper the answers are in the damn
papers. They don't read the papers. What
are you supposed to do?
>> Oh my goodness. That's so crazy. In your
first paper in 2012,
>> it's so crazy that it's sitting
underneath us.
>> Yes.
>> That that the knowledge is right there.
is is is right there, you know. I mean
that that's crazy, you know.
>> I know. It's unbelievable.
>> It's unbelievable.
>> Yeah. Go ask your friends to go down to
whatever oncology center you have down
there. They never heard that glucose is
a driver of disregulated cancer cell
growth.
>> Oh, no. Glucose is flying. Eat infaml.
They they Oh, what? You killing me?
That's take poison. It's like, give me a
break. We got 1,700 people day and and
they're suffering. It's not like, wow, a
heart attack is great, man. You have a
heart attack, boom, you're dead. You
don't have to worry about anything.
>> These poor cancer patients are
surgically mutilated. They're burned.
They're poisoned. I mean, give me a
break. Now, here here's the thing. With
metabolic therapy, you we can still use
many of the of the procedures that are
being used in oncology clinics, but we
would use them in a very very different
way, much lower dosages, much different
timing.
would constantly reduce the toxicity
associated with all these uh all these
things.
>> Yeah. Because as I'm seeing like as
you're saying all of this right now, if
somebody has cancer, then we have this
this this arsenal, right? Somebody comes
in, we find a tumor with an image that
was probably done 10 years later than
what it really should have been done.
But we find this big tumor. Oh, lo and
behold, there you got cancer. You had
cancer 14 years ago or 5 years ago or
three years ago. We just didn't see it.
And so now then we go with that with
with try to cut it out. We have
radiation, surgery, chemotherapy,
imunotherapy. Um and so all those five
four things. But, you know, as as the
knowledge base that you're putting out
into the world comes into clinical
practice and as the practice I think of
being able to detect with things like
the Grail test, with full body MRIs
things very very early like when they're
not a problem, you know, and then then
there's it's so much better to be able
to then I'm I'm understanding better the
metabolic therapy thing because it's not
just like like change your diet. there
is more to it and there is
pharmaceutical therapeutics that would
go along with a with a transition in
fuel source really of the of of the body
and then like what you're saying then
surgery then radiation then chemotherapy
then imunotherapy if those things but in
theory if we had a full body MRI of of
everybody before be before these things
turn into a mass and and and if what
what you're putting out into the world
is correct which it is many ways because
you've put out so much science for 20
years now more 20 plus right then like
the whole thing has to change of how we
approach this problem. Yeah, absolutely.
And and and what we we know is that and
we developed the glucose ketone index
calculator uh to allow cancer patients
uh to know how when how what it does is
it measures the ratio in millolar that's
the same um mass
concentration in a volume. Um ketones in
millolar uh and glucose in millolar. Um
and then uh um you bring you bring that
down to a low number. So most people in
our society today eating highly
processed uh foods with high
carbohydrate content have a very very
high GKI which means that the glucose
level in the blood is massively higher
than the ketone level in the blood. Mhm.
>> But when you do water only fasting,
restricted ketogenic diets, just uh even
vegan diets, uh carnivore diets,
pescatarian diets, whatever you do, you
eat tiny amounts of it and then all of a
sudden the glucose ketone index comes
down and when you get a uh in the zone
of 2.0 or below in that ratio, which we
published, again, it's in the
literature. Um this tumor cells start to
get hammered. Uh they start to uh up and
die. they slow down the inflammation in
the tumor micro environment becomes much
much much less um there's death
signaling killing tumor cells
inflammation angioenesis the abnormal
vascularization this is I we we use
these terrible drugs on people like
avastin oh my god what a terrible
terrible drug uh it's called bevicism
they call it a avastin it's supposed to
target target the blood vessels in the
tumor you can do that by by bringing
your glucose ketone index down, you can
target the blood vessels. We already
showed all this stuff. So, it doesn't
cost much money, right? A vast is
extremely expensive to do that. Whereas,
you could do the same thing with with
getting a a low GKI. Once the once the
patient is in a low GKI, which could
take 14 to 20 days, uh, which is okay,
and then you and then the inflammation,
the tumor cells start to die, everything
starts to get down. It's much less angry
in the micro environment. Okay. Then you
come in with the uh um uh parasite
medications and you come in with the
glutamine targeting drug and you start
slaughtering these damn tumor cells. And
just like you said, you could come in
with a small dose of radiation, a little
bit of chemo at the end or a little bit
of imunotherapy at the end. It's like
the finishing touch to get rid of
surviving cells. You don't come in like
a bull in a china shop and go after this
tumor with with things that aren't going
after the the energy source of the of
the cells. So you're 100% correct. The
whole process has to be re-evaluated and
done the correct way. If you want to
improve um quality of life and overall
survival. If people are interested in
impre improving quality of life and
overall survival, the system must
change, right?
>> And and it should change fast because
we're 1700 people a day are dying from
this.
>> Exactly. Exactly. It needs to be fast.
Um I interviewed actually Dorian, the
guy who came up with the keto mojo. uh
in his whole process. He was type two
diabetic. Diabetes goes away when he
goes into the ketogenic diet. He he he
comes up with the glucose meter, I mean
the ketone meter. Um and he's actually
surprisingly the only one in the market.
>> Yeah.
>> When there's another one I I Well,
Dorian came to me. He wanted to patent
the GKI for me. I can't patent. We
couldn't patent it. So, uh it turns out
patent they don't you don't patent a
formula. I developed a formula. We here
at Boston College developed the formula,
but we couldn't make any money on it. So
Dorian,
>> you you cannot patent a formula?
>> No. Ah, it's crazy. So yeah, so Dorian
ran with it. He wanted to patent it from
Boston College and we went over to the
patent office. Oh, no, you can't patent
a formula. So he said, "Oh, can I use?"
I said, "Hey, be my guest. Use it." Now
he's making all the money on the on the
Keto Mojo meters. But uh and then
everybody thinks I'm making money. No, I
got all my all our research comes from
philanthropy. All of our support comes
from private foundation and
philanthropy.
>> Uh so we have a we have a number of
really good people that are interested
in helping save the lives of thousands
of people knowing that we can do that. U
so they just want to be part of it. And
then when we and then when we publish
these papers we put that's why if you
look at my publications on open access
which anybody can who has a computer can
go on the web and look at them. You say
who the hell are all these people
in the acknowledgement section? Well,
those are the guys giving us the money
to do what we need to do. They're the
philanthropists and the foundation
people.
>> I think, you know, when you're telling
me all of this, I mean, I think so. I
think there is like one issue, right?
Um,
>> if my colleague as an oncologist gets a
four stage cancer, lung cancer, the
lady's already dying. Um, like what else
they got, right? It's almost like if
you're in war and you already have a
SWAT team inside of your house, like all
you got to do is like all you got left
is a grenade, you know, and run out the
back door if you can. And so it's like
and so it's very similar like I think
currently like today what is an
oncologist what is their toolbox? Like
if they go into an inst a a stage four
lung cancer patient and tell them look
all we got to do is change your ketone
index and you know first of all they're
probably going to like start people are
going to start questioning their license
and and it's brutal brutal right I mean
it's just brutal they'll take their
license away even even if they read your
papers even read your papers
>> well this is the problem and the day was
there right
>> yeah well this is the this is the
problem because the medical establish
lishment itself has written the cancer
standard of care in granite. It's not
able to be changed. It should a standard
of care should always be flexible in in
adapting to the new information that
comes along.
>> Uh uh but it's not. And and and I know a
lot of good MDs, physicians that really
want to do metabolic therapy and they're
prevented from doing this for fear of
losing their license because it has not
been sanctioned by the medical
establishment.
So, so uh yeah, you go to the hospitals
and so so the question is um and we keep
publishing in in in uh good quality
science journals for our um colleagues
scientific and MD colleagues and they
and they know what we're talking about
but but they always say oh we got to do
another experiment you got do we know
what enough to do to keep people alive
um we should be doing that and then and
then perfecting it as we go forward And
and I I have to be we we don't want to
um tell people that are in hospice, oh
we have the solution to bring you out of
hospital. When you're in hospice,
>> the system has already uh run its
course. You know, we see a number of
people that um have stage four cancer,
they're diagnosed with, but they feel
pretty good. They I didn't know I had
such a a big problem. Those are the guys
those you hit those guys up front with
the metabolic therapy and bring that
whole thing under control. Uh and then
when it's shrunken down, you could use a
small dose of radiation or even a
surgical procedure and get rid of it. Um
there's a lot of ways we can manage
stage four cancers if you get it upfront
with the metabolic therapy. The problem
is is if you start poisoning these poor
people, surgically mutilating them, the
cancer spreads through the damn body
because you've created a wound that
actually cultivates the growth of these
damn tumor cells. So because they're
they're macrofasages and macrofasages
get all fired up when when you have
inflammation in the body. So, so we're
doing everything wrong. Uh, we're we're
not doing it the right way. Now, I'm not
saying we don't use radiation in surgery
and chemo and imunotherapy, but we use
it in a in a in a very different way, at
a different time, a different dosage,
>> but let's bring the beast under control
in a dormant state and then come in and
finish it off with some of these other
things. We got everything bass
backwards. We're coming after these
tumors like a bullet cherry. Get that
out of you. Give you the toxic poison
surgically mutilate you. And the next
thing you know the poor person is, you
know, oh, he survives for a while and
he's, oh, I'm battling it came back. Oh,
it came back. Oh, it came back. It
shouldn't come back. When you hit it up
front with metabolic therapy and then go
after it like that, it I'm not saying we
can cancer. All I'm saying is we can
give these people a lot more opportunity
to live longer. If they are cured, there
you go. That's great. But they still
live on the planet longer than they
would have if they if they did something
different. That's our plan. That's our
plan.
>> And so and so I'm looking at this the
paper I think it was in 2012, right? The
paper you published on the the cancer is
a metabolic disease. I forget the title
of it.
>> That was that was 2010.
And then I wrote the my book uh cancer
is on the book uh from WY Press on
cancer as a metabolic disease.
metabolic.
>> Yeah. Then from that I we we started
publishing uh in scientific journals the
evidence to support uh what we had
already published.
>> So and we and then we developed the
press pulse therapeutic strategy that I
just told you about. You press the
glucose, you pulse the glutamine. Uh,
and and that becomes a and then our
biggest paper just came out uh a month
ago, less than a month ago, an actual
protocol treatment with with many MDs
and PhDs as co-authors on our paper,
which is really a how-to toolbox
strategy. Okay, what do I do? I got a
glyopblastoma. How do I manage this?
>> Or if I the same strategy can be used
for lung cancer, colon cancer, breast
can. So there all of the cancer cells
have the same basic problem. they they
can't live without glucose and glutamine
and they can't burn ketones or fatty
acids. So there's it's all the cancers
are basically very very similar bio bio
biologically and biochemically. So one
strategy would work against all these
different tumors. And so then when you
already had the insight okay this is a
metabolic disease completely different
paradigm shift of what we've been taught
and and think that we understand. And
then from there in mice you saw uh what
is it that you saw in mice or in rats
that you that led you to think we can
actually
start I mean you mentioned the glutamine
experiment where you tried each one of
the amino acids and then the glutamate
was the only one that shot up the cancer
>> growth glutamine
>> glutamine yeah
>> yeah glutamine
>> glutamine and the glucose and then but
but then what how did that translate
into like did you explaining for
everybody how did that translate into
like did the mices have cancer and did
you test half of them with this and half
of them with that?
>> Yeah. So that's what we we started
targeting uh glucose and glutamine uh in
vivo in mice that had metastatic cancer
and and living animals not in the dish
>> right
>> you you you can't really ferret it out
mechanisms clearly in a angry growing
tumor in the body because there's a lot
of cells a lot of inflammation a lot of
lot of lot of lot of stuff dead cells
living cells prol cells all these
fibroblast macrofasia all kinds of cells
in this in this living and growing tumor
So you you have to be able to take the
cells out of the tumor and then
interrogate them in different
environments in vitro and then you find
out what ultimately they need to survive
and then and then you go back in vivo in
the living thing and then you target
those two fuels and you see oh my god
this thing is so um and as I said we saw
the shrinkage of blood abnormal blood
vessels which is called
anti-angiogenesis
uh we saw a big shutdown of inflammation
NF cap obese uh driven inflam
inflammation
>> and inflammation you're saying the
decrease in CRP levels ESR levels how do
you
>> CRP CRP is a blood marker for uh inflam
systemic inflammation normally like if
you have type 2 diabetes or obesity or
this you often times see high levels of
of CRP in your bloodstream now when we
do ketogenic metabolic therapy those
markers go down C reactive protein goes
down insulin goes down glucose goes down
all of a lot of these biomarkers that
are telling you you're unhealthy all you
start to becoming healthy. So that's
also you're starving now these tumor
cells they're they're they're getting
beat up on this. So uh so then you
shrink it down. You could do uh
non-invasive imaging like MRI PET scans
CAT scans and you can see what you
thought was there uh now becomes smaller
and sometimes goes away completely. So
you have then many options to say oh oh
it went away. What? What are we going to
do? It went away. What are we going to
do? Or it was there, but now it's much
much smaller. Okay. Now the surgeon can
say, "Oh, I can take that out now real
quick without any collateral damage to
the surrounding tissue." Wow, that's
great. So, um, and that's what we're
trying to emphasize here. If you can get
rid of it completely, that's wonderful.
But if it doesn't go away completely,
then you have these other strategies
that you can add on to to to shrink it
down and take it away. And when you were
looking at rats,
>> let's say at mice, um, when you were
looking at mice, let's say like out of a
out of 10 mices with endstage or or or
stage 4 and what type of cancer was it?
And then how like how many of them
roughly like had a good response to what
what is being called what you guys are
are are naming pressing and
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So um all every
one of them had a good response but we
were never able to cure any of them.
Okay. So when you say uh we have to
realize in cancer you talk about um
progressionfree survival and you talk
about overall survival. Okay. we were
able to improve significantly
progressionfree survival and overall
survival relative to those animals that
were not given the metabolic therapy. So
the guys not getting the metabolic
therapy became full of metastatic cancer
and and they died relatively quickly
after the the tumor grew and spread. Uh
but the animals getting the treatment
which is the cocktail of diet drug
combination were we were able to keep
them alive massively longer than the
guys that were not treated. But uh we
are on the cutting edge of the press
pulse therapeutic strategy requires a
perfection of dosage timing and
scheduling which we will eventually have
to deal with in the clinic with humans
because because it's that how what time
how much do you give at that point when
do you give it and schedule it with the
diet and do all these other kinds of
things so to maximize the therapeutic
benefit of what you're doing.
>> Yeah. And the delivery of it.
>> Yes. Yes. how it's delivered, how what
the dosage, the timing, the scheduling,
all of this kind of stuff will
constantly improve overall survival
longer and longer and longer once you
begin to know the perfect. Now, uh I
always tell when you go to NIH to get
grants, they're not interested in dosing
timing and scheduling. That's not sexy
science,
but that's ultimately what's going to
manage the disease. Ultimately, you're
going to you're going to once you
understand the proper dose timing and
scheduling for diet drug combinations,
you're going to keep these people alive
a hell of a lot longer. Oh, but that's
not sexy science. But it works. That's
what's ultimately going to manage the
problem. So, that's what's always funny
to me, too, because you know, they
always like to know, oh, what gene is
turned on? What's the molecular
mechanism of this and that? I says, we
got 1700 people dying in the clinic and
you're worried about that kind of stuff.
You know, we we know how to manage the
disease. All we have to do is perfect
dosage, timing, and scheduling. And now
we have humans that are doing really
really well. Now our guys I was gonna
ask you. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I published we published these
things individual case reports on
humans. We got people that had stage
four cancer spread to the lungs to the
brain all over the body and they're
still alive. They went into a metabolic
state. How long are they going to live?
I don't know. But they're living a hell
of a lot longer than they were.
>> They're not doing they're not doing
they're not doing the pharmaceutical
They're just doing the ketogenic part.
They're not doing the pharmaceutical
targeting of the glutamine inhibition,
right?
>> Yeah, most of them aren't. Uh they're
just doing the glucose targeting. So, we
always felt if they did the glutamine
targeting on top that it would happen a
lot quicker and a lot be a lot lot more
effective. But the key drug, Don, is not
allowed to be used. This is nuts. I had
if I had cancer, I know where to get it
and I would take it myself for sure.
But, uh poor guys like you and others,
you you guys are
>> So, why is it not being able to use? I
mean, These are complex.
>> Yeah. Well, they said they used it on
little kids and cancer patients in the
past. There was a plenty of literature
on this drug. Uh but they felt that it
wasn't as effective as it could be and
its level of toxicity uh uh was similar
to that of other toxic like red devil,
Dr. Rubeson and all these other terrible
chemicals they used. So they felt it
wasn't any better. Uh it was off patent.
You can't make any money on it. So uh
but we found a way to keep the power of
that drug there and remove the toxicity
from that drug which now makes it
extremely valuable. But we can't use it
because they feel that it's it's off.
You can't make money on it.
>> But you can patent but you can patent
that next modification, right?
>> Well, that's what John's Hopkins is
trying to do. They're trying to modify
the structure of Dawn. But but the these
guys, they want to make money on the
drug. And if you use the drug alone by
itself, you do get some therapeutic
benefit. But you got to put that patient
in nutritional ketosis to get the real
power of what that drug is going to do.
And they don't want to do that because
they say they told me not the the
different drug companies said I said
your drug will work a lot better if you
can get your patient in nutritional
ketosis. Oh, we sorry we can't do that
because we won't know if that patient
does really well. We won't know if it's
our drug or their nutritional ketosis
that was responsible for the success. I
said, who cares? is the patient's
living. They're not interested in that.
They they want to make the money on the
drug.
>> So So you're up against that whole
industry, too. I mean, revenue, the
revenue generation.
>> Our goal. Our goal is very simple. How
long can we keep people diagnosed with
cancer alive and a higher quality of
life for far longer than what would have
been expected. That's all. And that's
success. That's success in. Why do you
have to make all this money on this
stuff? Just say people are living
longer. They're they're doing better.
Okay, great. That tells us we're on the
right track.
>> Yeah. And so then are there in the
future, do you see a future where you're
going to start using the new version of
this glutamine? Uh you're calling it
DON, right? D uh
>> D. Yeah. But it's it's only an it's only
an anacronym for six deoxyorucine.
It's a it's a it's a molecule that looks
just like glutamine, but it's but it's
not glutamine. Got it. And it blocks the
glutamine pathway. And it was isolated
from a bacteria, from a plant, some sort
of bacteria it was isolated from. So,
it's like an antibiotic of some sort.
>> And it was used on the kids. It was used
on little kids with leukemia. It's not
like it's never been used on people
before. It's just there. But the
pharmaceutical companies, you can't get
it. So, um you just can't go you can't
get it. Uh it's just not available. So,
and the drug companies all know about
this. Believe me, they all they're all
trying to modify it uh in some to keep
its uh and that and we're all interested
in the same thing. you know, how do you
how do you modify this drug so that it
contains that it has retains its
powerful therapeutic benefit and uh and
doesn't have the toxicity? And one of
the ways to do that is you put your
patients in nutritional ketosis which
now you don't need nearly the
concentration of Dawn and you get a very
powerful therapeutic effect with a lower
concentration thereby reduced toxicity.
But the problem is you can't get done.
You can't. It's not available.
>> And localized uh localized delivery too
like delivering it directly into where
>> it's better to deliver it with I
intravenous like a port. U we do we do
it IP intraparitinal which is like a
port. It doesn't work as well uh oral uh
because the stomach acid breaks it down.
Got So that's why the pharmaceutical
companies are trying to make derivatives
of Dawn that can be acid resistant in
the stomach and allow that to get into
the bloodstream a little bit better.
There's a lot of variations that are
being worked out and there's other
glutamine inhibiting drugs as well.
>> So I was going to ask none of them seem
to to work as well because Don is what
we call a dirty drug and a dirty drug
hits multiple targets simultaneously. So
if you want to patent a drug, generally
you have a a drug at a very specific
kind of a target and that's oh that's so
unique. I got that. But uh glutamine
targeting is very ambiguous. There's a
lot of transporters for glutamine,
different enzymes. Donna hits them all.
Don hits them all. So and that's why it
works so well. But you can't make money
on it.
>> Yeah.
>> So So you're up against But you know,
people want to live, man. The only way
we're going to we're going to change
this system is there has to be a a mass
outcry on the pot on the part of the
population.
>> People are just have to walk into these
damn oncology centers, I want metabolic
therapy. I want metabolic.
>> Exactly. Exactly.
>> The guy who Yeah. And then the doctors
who know how to administer metabolic
therapy can set up clinics, train
physicians, and know exactly. And this
is what we're trying to do now. We're
trying to train physicians. We're trying
to work with people to do this. But of
course it takes money and uh most of the
money that's being raised for cancer
research is thrown about the same stupid
stuff they've been doing for decades
targeting gene mutations and you know
imunotherapies are based on the sematic
mutation theory of cancer. The sematic
mutation theory says that cancer is
caused by gene mutations. So when you
look at imunotherapies yes they do work
well for a number of people. Yes, they
do. But they also have no effect on
large numbers of people and some of them
cause hyper progressive disease. This is
where the drug kills you faster than the
cancer does. So those precision
medicines all of a sudden see a marker
on a normal cell that's not part of the
cancer, not part of the tumor, and they
attack and blow out your liver and blow
out your kidneys. Doesn't happen to
everybody, but it certainly happens to
enough people to say, and that's why
these drug companies aren't hiding
anything. If you go at night listen to
the TV commercials on Opivvo and
Katruda, they spend more time telling
you how the damn drug is going to kill
you than how it's going to help you. But
they're not hiding anything. They're
telling you right up this drug can kill
you. Well, what the hell are you taking
anything that has a remote possibility
of killing you? Because they're all
looking for that shot. Oh, but it's the
20% of people that do really well. I
said, well, listen, metabolic therapy is
certainly not going to kill you. That's
one thing. It's not It's only going to
make you healthier. So, uh, and that's
we've seen over and over again. But, you
know, it's a work in progress. It is
definitely a paradigm shift. It will
happen because it's based on hard
science more so than any other strategy
out there. So, it's just it's going to
take time for the public to know, for
the hospitals and the scientists and the
oncologists. They all have to be
retrained. They have to know what I'm
talking about. Otherwise, we don't make
any progress. Yeah. Because it's almost
seems like the approach is probably
going to be almost like Dr. Ornes did
with the heart disease. um where it's
going to take so much time, so many case
reports that then start compiling data
and then understanding okay patients
that don't go to same like with
functional medicine patients that don't
go to metabolic therapy
>> they do horrible compared to patients
that do um and then eventually then that
will be under
the problem they you got to have a
trained person who understands what to
do and how to do it and the strategy she
behind it. Like they had a German trial
over there, the Argo trial, European,
and the patients are sitting there
eating tubs of lard, you know, this is
not this is nuts. And they saw it didn't
work so well. A lot of these people
couldn't were not compliant. Well, who
the hell would sit down and eat a tub of
lard and be compliant about it? You
know, you don't we we ma the we can do
Mediterranean diets. We can do
pescatarian carnivore diet. All of these
diets can be manufactured to give you a
low glucose ketone index. Culturally
appropriate,
religiously appropriate diets can all be
made to bring a low GKI. Low GKI. People
always ask me, can I eat this? Can I
have no idea what does it do to your
GKI,
>> right? Yeah.
>> And then you'll know what you can and
cannot eat. And that could vary from one
person to the next. And the GKI, if
somebody's listening right now and they
have cancer and their GKI,
they get a glucose meter, they get a
ketone meter, what are they shooting
for?
>> Yeah, they're shooting for 2.0 or below.
And then and then uh a lot of people say
to me, not a lot. Many people come back,
don't forget, I'm not a physician. I
can't tell anybody what to do or what
not to do. Correct. All I can do is give
them the literature and the scientific
information they have to work out.
>> Well, you guys have shown. Yeah.
Exactly.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, so they say, "Oh, you
know, I got my GKI down." And a lot of
them start to say, "Oh, the tumors are
but yes, the tumors grow slower." Yes.
Um um they but they're not always gone.
Uh uh but you start to slow the whole
process down when you're in that zone.
Now, you would come in with the
glutamine targeting drugs and nobody's
doing that. That's the problem. So, if
you they're in they get great. They work
hard. They battling their other thing.
When you do metabolic therapy, the
burden of success rides on your
shoulders. You know, you're not sitting
there as some bystander with somebody's
poisoning or radiating you. You're
you're actually taking charge of your
existence by by fighting to get your GKI
down. And a lot of people do that and
then they say, "Okay, what next?" Well,
now you can actually take lower doses of
chemo and you can take small doses of
radi. All these things will work a lot
better. But the darn physicians don't
know that. They give you the high dose
already. Uh again, it's it's like the
blind leading the blind in this whole
thing right now.
>> Yeah. Because I mean that's the tools
they got, you know, that's that's what
they got to do. And then they don't do
that.
>> If they don't do that, they're they're
ostracized. They're they're licenses are
taken away if they don't do that, you
know. And so,
>> well, I we're not telling them not to do
that. We're just telling to adjust the
concentration, the timing in a little
different way based on the success of
the person's physiology as the response
of his of his into this new metabolic
state.
>> And again,
>> but if you're sitting there tell
thinking that cancer is a genetic
disease and you were trained in medical
school and you read textbooks and all
these biology books, cancer is a genetic
disease, all this genetics, genetics,
genetic, you're not thinking about any
of the stuff I'm talking about.
>> Yeah. So your your bra you're
indoctrinated
on a different view of what cancer is.
Cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease clearly.
>> And the mutations that you see in cancer
are downstream effects of the abnormal
energy metabolism of the mitochondria.
>> When
we shoot for a GKA of 1.0 1.1 you said
one
>> no no uh 2.0
>> 2.0. What is that? That means the body
is using more ketones than sugar for
energy.
>> Yeah, it it pretty much. Yes. So that so
you're you're now don't forget
in your body the biggest consumers of
sugar is the brain.
>> Brain has a rapacious appetite for sugar
and muscles. So when you exercise,
you're taking sugar out of your
bloodstream to burn the muscles. and
your brain is always going to have an
open uh on the sugar.
>> Okay.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Ciphford on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rockermeer, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereed's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker has already made at
www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just
>> But if I'm lowering my GKI, I'm lowering
blood sugar, my brain and exercising. If
I if I exercise and have a low GKI, the
last group of cells to need get the
sugar are the tumor cells,
>> right?
>> So, they're going to get hammered
because the other cells in the body are
now craving that same fuel that the
tumor cell absolutely has to have to
survive. But our muscles and our brain
are going to be taking it. Uh now if
you're if you're a type two diabetic and
you have blood sugars that are really
high and all the tumor is always fat and
happy. The tumor cells are going to be
extremely happy in that environment.
>> And that's why you can see with type two
diabetics their cancer rates are
>> off the charts compared to anybody else.
That's that's been proven and shown. And
so then as a and then the the blood
sugar you're targeting what 70 80 70 80.
>> Well we yeah we can get down uh 70 you
can get down to 70 milligrams per
deciliter. Then we convert that over to
millim mole. It's about 3.5 somewhere in
that area. So and the ketones jump up to
about two and a half three blood sugar
about so you get almost unity for sugar
and and ketones. And don't forget the
normal cells are switching over to the
ketone bodies. Uh because the brain and
the muscles are got to got to have most
of it. The muscle does not share sugar
with other organs because that's an
evolutionary you have to understand
evolutionary biology. We evolved to to
escape from predators. So if the l if
you're oh my muscles are sharing glucose
with the brain and everything else the
lion is coming I have no energy to run
away from him.
>> So the muscles must keep the sugar to
run away from the lion or the bear or
whatever going to
>> yeah they they've done some beautiful
studies on glucose receptor uh
expression in muscle during fasting
states and the muscle wins. Muscle wins.
So there in the body and you're using
your muscles muscle muscle wins. Yeah,
>> that's biological evolution. You got to
know about this stuff. And and then
people say to me, "Oh, I don't
understand biological evolution." I
said, "Do you understand the obesity
epidemic? Have you not seen obese people
walking around in our different cities?"
Those are the those are the the the
descendants of ancestors that lived in
the Paleolithic period. During the
paleolithic period of our existence on
the planet, which was like 100,000
200,000 years ago, uh we were lean and
mean and we had no we had no
carbohydrate highly processed
carbohydrates, right? There was no
Dunkin Donuts and delic delicatessins
around for the Paleolithic man. Where
did he get his carbs from? He was mostly
in nutritional ketosis. He killed and
ate animals. Okay, so he was uh had a
lot of exercise. Guys, you know how hard
it is to track down and kill an elephant
or a woolly mammoth and or a deer? You
have to you and and then and then chop
the hell out of this thing and eat it
and all this. Uh I mean, today we're
sitting in traffic. We're looking at
computers. We're eating donuts. We're
and we're getting fat and and we are
evolved to store energy. We're we're
that kind of we're very active species.
And all of a sudden, our technology has
moved so much faster than our biology.
So, we have all these fat people walking
around. It's and they are the they are
the descendants of people that s
survived the ice ages and survived
famines and and movements and all this.
And now we have all the the things that
we never had in our existence. And we
have type two diabetes. We have all
these chronic diseases, dementia,
cancer, all these kind of things.
They're all related to a change from who
we evolved to be and who we are today.
This is not a mystery. So the ep the
obesity epidemic is evolution in action.
You don't understand biological
evolution, you understand obesity
epidemic. And that's evolution in
action. And you got to know that. So all
we're trying to do is when you go into
nutritional ketosis, you're bringing
yourself back into the t the state that
you were in during the paleolithic
period where uh um energy metabolism is
going to be maximized. Every cell in the
body must justify its existence for
being in that body. There's no there's
no room for the lame, the weak, the in
the the dysfunctional like a cancer
cell. So, so you just have to use your
body. The body is incredible um healing
machine. If you give it the opportunity
to heal. Uh right now we're, you know,
for cancer, you're poisoning people,
radiating them, you're making the body
weak, cancer cells will survive. And
then you give them all the sugar and the
glutamine they need. Geez, I expect 1700
people a day dying from cancer. Not a
mystery.
Not a mystery. And then the the issue,
you know, and and and I mean, I see this
coming through the hospital doors. Some
may call us a hospital.
>> We transform medicine with the region's
only level one trauma.
>> Younger and younger like you said and
like that's what I was asking you the
type of brain cancer because the
glyobblastomas I mean they're just
ruthless. Um recently young very
successful couple you know 39 years old
with three kids. I mean just gone you
know and so
>> it shouldn't have to be that way.
>> Exactly. Exactly. they shouldn't from
the
>> well we told
>> we told the uh uh uh neurooncologists
that the worst thing you can do for for
a brain cancer patient is irdiate them
um especially for glyopblasto because
what it does is it frees up massive
amounts of glucose and glutamine in the
tumor micro environment and then they
give highdose steroids like
dexamethasone uh to the brain cancer
patient to reduce the inflammation but
that makes the their sugar go through
the roof so we went through the
mechanism and showed them uh why these
GBM M patients are all dying over a very
as a matter of fact we published a paper
showing they really haven't much been
very much advanced from 1926. So we
really have in 1926 death from
glyopblasto was 8 to 14 months in 2024
it's 8 to 17 months so we have made no
advance in glyopblasto in almost a
hundred years. No.
>> Yeah. And even and even with like at
UCLA they they started the trial with
vaccine. So they take the tumor, they
make a vaccine out of it and put it back
and that Yeah, you're right.
>> It's absurd. It's absurd. Those people
should have their head examined. The
damn tumor cells can't live without
glucose and glutamine. How is the
vaccine going to target the glucose and
glutamine? If the vaccine does a good
job in taking away glucose and
glutamine, it might be successful. But a
vaccine can also cause more inflammation
driving in more and more glucose and
glutamine to the micro environment. I
don't know what's wrong with people as
everything that I've just told you
today. I I might as well be speaking in
some foreign language. Uh for anyone to
think that I'm going to take a vaccine
and I'm going to get the kind of
therapeutic benefit that you should be
is not
>> like it's like it's like taking is like
taking the car like you don't fuel your
car or you don't charge your car. He's
dead. And so is is the source of the
ability of the cancer cells to be able
to reproduce is the root of it. You know
>> where they get their energy from. You
can't grow without energy. And they're
very limited in how they get energy.
They can't get anything from glucose and
only that. So pull the plug on those
fuels and you'll kill the tumor cells.
And yet you go in for a vaccine. I'm
going to radiate you. I'm going to do
this. I'm do. I said, "What the hell,
man? Don't you read the scientific
literature?" He should understand what's
going on. But do you think that this is
what happened like with Dr. Ornish where
when he did his heart failure program?
I'm not sure if you're familiar with it.
Um they these patients heart endstage
heart failure uh uh patients very sick.
He took them to this that was 20 years
ago took him through this process uh
very strict diet very strict exercise
regimen all of this uh ejection fraction
in the heart improves uh aosclerosis in
the vessels themselves improve but then
what happened is that they started
seeing prostate cancer markers
drop.
>> Yeah. And so with and I mean and the
pictures are incredible and I think from
their perspective it was more an
epigenetic um they didn't go down all
the way the level in their papers down
to glucose and glutamine um that that
might have been the mechanism by which
this low carbohydrate low-fat diet ended
up dropping these people's prostate
cancer markers down is probably what
it's probably the same a lot of doing
Yeah, a lot of it is overlapping. Uh you
you have to look at all these
physiological markers and you begin to
see commonalities in the way these
things work. So I I mean I know and then
when you say lowfat uh diet usually um
low fat means high carbs. Um
>> and I in this case they're like it's
like a super strict vegan diet. They
measure
>> uh well we we've seen you know anything
that can lower the blood the glucose
ketone index. You can do it if as a a
vegetarian, a Mediterranean, a
pescatarian, a carnivore. So, it's it's
whatever that person wants to do. We we
seem to find it work better with uh
carnivore. Not to say that I and people
meat's bad for you. Well, if you eat
crap meat that's all artificially
produced and full of hormones, all this
other stuff, then maybe it isn't the
best thing. But, you know, our ancestors
weren't weren't eating highly processed
uh hormonally driven cows and elephants
that they ate. They were eating eating
organic organic animals, right? So, um
but yeah, uh the whole thing has to be
re-evaluated in light of biological
evolution. If everything nothing in
makes sense except in the light of
evolution. And if people don't
understand that, then they are
susceptible to uh quackery and uh uh and
we understand that real well. And when
you understand that, then you can design
things that really work and has a solid
scientific platform
>> exactly.
>> Otherwise, you're, you know, you're
scratching around. You don't know what
you're doing.
>> And so, what's next for you? Um how do
you see this process or what what is
exciting to you right now? And what do
you think you're going to be working in
the next uh in the next years or so?
>> Well, we're we're going to go through
all the major cancers to show that they
they all they're all similar in their in
their uh uh ability to get energy from
glucose and glutamine. Uh and and
perfecting dosage timing and scheduling
so we can translate it immediately over
to the clinics. So, um we're again
perfecting dosage, timing, and
scheduling. uh also uh looking more
carefully at the two pathways that are
driving the um metabolic uh uh we call
it substrate level phosphorilation which
is energy without oxygen. Um we're
looking at the mechanisms by which we
can improve that. Uh testing different
tumors with different uh drugs and diets
for sure and trying to perfect this
whole thing to make it as seamless as
possible
>> so that it can be immediately translated
over into the clinics and let and then
write case reports uh on human beings uh
more preclinical studies linking
pre-clinical studies with outcome in
clinics. It's a work in progress. And
eventually the weight of the evidence is
going to be so overwhelming
>> that and then they're going to say, "Oh,
this was obvious all the time." No, it
wasn't,
>> right?
>> No, it was. And you guys didn't know
anything about glutamine fermentation.
We showed that, right?
>> Okay. And we were the one who
resurrected Otto Warberg and showed
where he made mistakes, where he was
correct, and where he was not correct.
>> So, we're just building it. You have to
do that's the way science works. And
there's a lot of resistance to things
that are uh that uh disturb disruptive
uh technologies
changing the status quo.
>> Yeah.
>> People are all very comfortable and
happy in what they're doing except
everybody except the cancer patients.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so we're going to change all that
will change. All that'll change.
>> Yeah. It's it's interesting because I
mean you see that with the with the
intensive uh cardiac rehab programs that
Dr. Ernish put in place. It was the
same. Oh, this is all BS.
>> And then it's like, oh wait, if the
patients are in this program, they don't
come to the hospital as much. So maybe
we should start, so Medicare start
looking at it.
>> And so it seems like the same thing
should happen where the patients that
are in this program don't come to the
hospital as much. They get better as
much and then Medicare will end up
having to pay for it because it's just
better medicine and the and the cost is
lower too, you know.
>> Yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. So you're
you're going to start to see uh things
things just like this. Uh but but also
that you have to realize that people in
general, human nature is I want the easy
way out. I I don't want to I don't want
to have to exercise, you know, I don't
want to have to not eat a big donut. I I
don't want to have to do that. Um so
that's why we have Ozic and we have um
all of these new drugs that people would
rather take than do the exercise.
But actually, that stuff will get your
GKI down, too.
>> That's what I was about to tell you
because I mean, essentially, the GLP1s
are just making you fast and making you
have a caloric restriction because they
make your brain think you're full. You
know what I mean?
>> Exactly the same.
It's exactly the same thing. You take a
drug to make if you have no personal
discipline, you can take this drug. It
will do the same. Yeah. It's hard to get
hungry when you feel nauseated all the
time. You know, keto. Yeah. Chemo does
that, too. If you want to lose weight,
take chemo. You know, make Yeah. And
they're always concerned about how
healthy your microbiome is. Your
microbiome. You're right. Microbiome.
Everybody loves to talk about the
microbiome. A billion different bacteria
in your gut, all doing different kinds
of things going make you, you know,
you're going to be the next genius on
the planet. But then then you take
somebody and you give them radiation and
chemo and it destroys their whole
microbiome. And that's the other thing
that I was going to ask you or your
thoughts on it because in a lot of the
functional medicine microbiome
practices, they use glutamine a lot.
Glut well that that's the that's the
double-edged sword of glutamine.
Glutamine helps your gut and it helps
your immune system, but it also helps
the cancer cell. That's why you have to
pulse it. You have to pulse it. You want
to maintain the power of of glutamine to
help you, but at the same time, you want
to make sure that it's targeting the
tumor cell that needs the same fuel that
the gut and the immune system need.
That's the beauty of what we're doing.
>> And so in essence, you think that we
could go because I know you've mentioned
before that like that there was a study
that was done in Africa and there was no
cancers, right, in certain areas or
certain communities. Um,
in essence, what your research is
showing us is that there is a future
where with very early detection and
metabolic therapy, the push and the
pulse,
>> Yeah. we could really really tap in,
dialed in into somebody in their 30s
before these things become bigger and
really kind of change the trajectory of
their lives.
>> Oh, absolutely. Well, that's one thing
that's nice about metabolic therapy. Not
not only does it uh come to play uh with
you have pharmacy and metabolic therapy
to manage cancer but with a very slight
modification you can also prevent cancer
because cancer arises from chronic
damage to mitochondria with with
compensatory fermentation. If you keep
your mitochondria healthy it's very very
difficult to get cancer in the first
place and exercise and the types of
diets and things that keep you with a
low GK. why we built the GKI, glucose
Q10 index calculator here at Boston
College, predominantly for cancer
people. But it turns out like young guys
like yourself and all these guys that
want to be healthy, they're all looking
at their GKI. I got a low GKI. I'm super
healthy, man. I'm like a PALEOLITHIC
MAN.
WELL, you ain't going to get cancer.
>> Hey, but that that that's that's where
the shift starts has to happen. And then
if we can start grabbing people when
they're very early on in their disease
with all this amazing technology that we
have, I mean the grail test and full
body MRIs and things like that and then
we can focus on the GKI.
>> Yeah.
>> And push.
>> Yeah. But obviously we got a obesity
epidemic. These guys aren't looking at
their GKI. No.
>> You know, you know, you got all these
problems. So, but that's because it's
education. education to come into the
society and know that to prevent cancer,
you got to keep your mitochondria
healthy. You have to exercise. You have
to eat the right foods. You got to keep
a lower GKI. You can't you and and and
this has to be and you know some of the
folks that are in the poor the poor
socioeconomic groups, they don't have
any of this access. They don't have any
knowledge. They need to know this stuff
to keep themselves healthy. And uh and
listen, they'll do it if they knew if
they know about it, know what to do and
they have a tool because the GKI can you
can put it on your cell phone and now
they have free Libra of glucose meters.
It's attached to your cell phone. All
this technology as you said it's there.
It's just that we have to start using it
in the right way
>> and then things change,
>> you know.
>> So,
>> absolutely. Well, thank you so much for
uh for having a conversation with us
today. I mean, this is just really
exciting and and and and it's really
cool to understand that somebody's
actually getting to the intricacies and
the commonalities of what of what cancer
is. Um because it's been this vague
thing for so many years. And so, and I
feel like your group and your team are
beginning to understand and to shed
light on that. Uh and and that
transparency
over the years is going to provide so
much help for the world, you know.
>> Yeah. Oh, absolutely. That's what's
going to happen. It's going to happen.
It's just we're the tip of the spear on
this old thing.
>> Exactly.
>> So, uh uh and they'll all come to know
it sooner because but we're still hard
the science. Hard the science. Get the
science. Get the science. Get the
science. And that's what we do. That's
what we do.
>> That's it. Dr. Zaf and somebody wants to
The name of your book was
>> Yeah. It's cancer as a mitochondrial.
People get angry at me. This they they
say, "Oh, um, they say, "Oh, how come
you charge so much money for this book?"
It's a John Wy Press. John Wy Press and
I only wrote one book a book, this one.
There's other people out there saying I
wrote this and I wrote that. These
scammers and things. I didn't. This is
the only book that I wrote. And all of
our all of our funding comes from
philanthropy and private foundations.
And the way I see it, I mean, and the
way I see it is that um
>> if somebody's selling me a bottle of
water in the desert, like it's okay. And
if they have to work so hard to get it,
like why don't I pay why don't I want to
pay like or if my friend owns a
restaurant, why don't I want to pay him
double for the meal? Like, you know what
I mean? Like like to to to add the value
of the of your life's work. I think the
people who are like making these
comments, they just don't understand the
the the the amount of work and diligence
and heartache that it takes to push
something like this out to be able to
create like a parent shift in the world.
And so I mean the book is is is is is
the price is nothing to to the value
that it adds, you know,
>> and the new papers that we have support
what the book was saying. So, and that's
free
>> that that's open access on the you have
a computer put my name in you can get
all the papers that we're publishing and
we have our own YouTube site now it's
called talking cancer with professor
seaf and then I answer questions and and
people write in and and I have to be
honest you have to kind of break it down
smaller and smaller bits a lot of people
say oh what about the diet what can I
how do I get rid of glutamine blah blah
blah and all this kind of stuff you got
to realize they have to understand press
pulse I I try to do my best in bringing
the science to a level that the most
common guys can understand
>> and believe me that's a challenge. Um
because on the other hand I got to talk
to the professionals in the field that
understand all the biochemistry and we
talk on that level but then we have to
talk on the level for the guy work the
lay person. He wants to know about this.
What can he do and how does how can he
help himself and and and we try to help
him do that and ultimately it has to be
the conversation between the lay person
and the knowledgeable physician and they
work together as a team. The problem now
is that the po in in the field of of
oncology
uh that knowledge base is not there and
that's one of the great tragedies. Uh
you know like if you do orthopedics they
have tremendous advances in orthopedic
surgery and all this and cardiovascular
surgery and some parts of medicine have
just skyrocketed in their sophistication
but oncology is is still stuck in the
stone age. They they're they're they
just don't understand what's going on or
I don't know if they don't want to
understand it. They just don't
understand it. But they're going to have
to come to understand because cancer is
killing more and more people every year,
>> right? I think they understand from a a
downstream effect and the technology,
proton therapy, things like that. The
surgeries are getting better, but the
the the upstream effect, the down the
the the root of it, I think, is is is
very blind. And it's a big blind spot
that you're
>> that you're shedding light into. Well,
the bottom line is we got all those dead
people coming in. I mean, that tells you
whether you know what's going on or not.
If you have 1,700 people a day dying at
70 an hour, there's something wrong
here. You can't tell me that we're doing
great work on cancer when we got 70
people dying per hour in the United
States from cancer. Something wrong.
There's no progress. No prog no
significant progress and drop in the
death rate. Yes, we have isolated
success stories, but the majority of
people aren't benefiting from that. And
that has to be recognized because we can
drop that death rate significantly if
done if metabolic therapy moves into
this space.
>> That's exciting times. I'm looking
forward to seeing how uh your work goes
in the next couple years and uh I'll be
tracking check out our big paper that we
just published with Dr. Durier, one of
my colleagues next door, Thomas Durier,
MDPhD. He he's the first author on the
big glyopblastoma treatment protocol
paper. Already it's one of the top
viewed papers. So you read it and look
at it and say, "Oh, okay. I could do
you're an MD. I could do all this. I
could do this."
>> Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. And and and and we
see these glyobblastoma patients and
it's just
>> brutal. It is it is gut-wrenching
brutal.
>> We want to stop that. We want to we want
to put a we want to put a cap on that.
>> Yeah. So and that's our goal. That's our
goal.
>> That's awesome. All right, Dr. Sfield,
thank you so much and you have a great
day out there.
>> Yeah, you too. and and thank you very
much for the conversation. Really
appreciate it. Thank you.